## Process
The purpose of what we do is to deliver value to users: students (prospective, applicant, current and alumni), staff and academics. This is the process we use to deliver our services.

### Delivery
This is our delivery process. It is based on agile delivery principles and can be run as part of a wider project, or independently. We should aim to release working software and services as often as possible rather than bundle all the changes up until the end of the work.

If you are delivering something new or complex you can increase learning and minimise risk to the University by delivering an Alpha version within a set period of time ('timebox'). Using this Alpha you can get feedback from users and check progress against goals before building a Beta version. If you are using this delivery flow you can run the stages below for the Alpha, and then again for the Beta.

#### Initiation

There are some things that need to be understood before a piece of work can start, with the understanding that things will change as we discover more through delivery.

* Who are the users and what needs are we trying to meet?
* How will we know what we have done has value?
* Who are the stakeholders?
* Are there any timelines?
* What other teams need to be involved?
* Are we depending on anyone else to finish their work, or are they depending on us?
* Who is producing content?
* Are there any technology or business change problems that need more planning/prototyping
* What’s our definition of done?
* What are the privacy and security considerations?
* What happens if we don’t do this - would there be any consequences?

Resolving these questions can sometimes be as simple as holding an initial stakeholder conversation, but sometimes will involve more detailed research and information gathering, which should be done and shared in advance of starting the development work. It is about understanding context and getting enough information to deliver something of value to real people for feedback.

#### Outputs of this phase

* Users and their high-level needs
* Metrics and measurements
* Team definition and organisation i.e. regular meetings in the calendar (stand-ups, showcases, retrospectives)
* Architecture/technical/research documentation
* Product or service roadmap with defined milestones and their target dates for a minimum of three months (See also [developing a roadmap](https://www.gov.uk/service-manual/agile-delivery/developing-a-roadmap) and the [example roadmap](https://app.productplan.com/p/bUmH4fHC0hOivX-E2LYMu2hg9uEhkWp_))

### Research

In order to deliver a product or service of value to the end user we need a shared understanding of:

* The user needs
* What users are doing right now to fulfil those needs
* What we need to measure

If your team has a UX Researcher they will lead this activity but everyone should take part and understand the insights generated by the research.

#### Outputs of this phase of the process

* [User journey maps](https://designnotes.blog.gov.uk/2016/04/21/how-to-make-a-user-journey-map/) about what happens now
* Desk research
* Data analysis
* Interview quotes
* Measurements and success criteria

This phase can also apply to API integrations with no user interface. Working on the assumption that someone is using the data in the systems involved we should speak to them about their current experience and challenges to make sure that our integration solves real problems.

### Design

Following the research, if the team is producing a user interface they should produce wireframes or prototypes. A team working on an API integration might produce an architecture or data flow diagram. The team can decide how detailed these should be. Following agile principles, we want to avoid doing too much upfront design, but we want to embrace solving complexity and tackling the hard problems early on.

#### Outputs of this phase of the process
* Wireframes
* Prototypes
* Architecture diagram
* User journey maps
* Data flow diagram
* Process maps

### Plan

A collaborative planning meeting should be organised by the product owner or other appropriate team member at the beginning of any cycle of work and should involve the whole team. The goal is to review the research and design work and identify a backlog of work and to plan how to release early and often. Implementing measurement should be a priority in these conversations.

A backlog would typically consist of user stories (ie 'As a learner I can easily find the project I was working on last time I visited the site so that I can get working quickly') and some tasks (i.e 'Set up continuous integration').

During this planning phase you should also consider how your new service will be supported once it's live and make sure the funding, people and things are in place to enable that to happen.

#### Outputs of this phase

* User stories
* Backlog
* Tasks
* Updated product or service roadmap with defined milestones and their target dates for a minimum of three months
* Service management plan

### Build

An amount of time will have been agreed to focus on a set of milestones. Typically this is from 2-4 weeks. The goal is to release value early and often, and shape your deliverables around that principle. Feature flags, limited rollouts and Alpha/Beta versions are all preferable to not releasing any work to users to get feedback.

During the build the team:

* Continue to understand and capture user needs
* Refine user stories
* Build accessible user interfaces
* Write secure code
* Hold stand-ups and retrospectives attended by the whole team
* Hold regular open showcases, aligned with the team’s cycle time, to demonstrate progress to a wider audience
* Do code reviews
* Do design reviews
* Release to production as often as possible
* Review analytics regularly to see the impact of the work

#### Outputs of this phase

* Working services with feedback mechanisms
* Measurement

### Live

The team has completed delivery when the success criteria have been met or the University decides to end the work for another reason (for example to realign with strategic priorities). Remember that delivery could have included several cycles of the process.

As part of moving to a live service from a beta service, typically the following activities occur:

* Review of the work
* Establishment of metrics to continue to measure outcomes
* Confirmation of business readiness for the new product or service by the service owner

When in live we need to:

* Support users of the service
* Deliver continuous improvements
* Maintain and upgrade the technologies
* Ensure ongoing security
* Ensure ongoing supplier and contract management
* Be aware of the performance of the service
